
🎓
Task 5
☰
🌙
Contents
Introduction
Part 1 — Socket.io Setup
Part 2 — Socket Rooms
Part 3 — Sending Announcements
Part 4 — Announcement History
Testing and Next Steps
📡
Second Semester Final Project
Task 5: Socket.io Integration
T5: Real-Time Announcements with Socket.io
Welcome! In this task, we will add the real-time feature to our project.

This feature allows the Admin to send live announcements directly to attendees registered for a specific event.

💡
Task Goal
Enable instantaneous, bi-directional communication between the server and connected clients without needing manual page refreshes.

First, we need to install Socket.io and attach it to our Express server.

1. Install Socket.io
Run the following command in your server terminal:

npm install socket.io

2. Modify app.js (or server.js)
To integrate Socket.io properly with Express, replace your standard app.listen() call with Node's HTTP server wrapper:

Import http and create a server: http.createServer(app).
Initialize Socket.io: new Server(httpServer).
Listen for new connections using io.on("connection") and log the connected socket.id in the console.
Handle the disconnect event to track when a user leaves.
✅
Verification
When a client connects, the terminal should print the unique socket.id, confirming active WebSocket connectivity.

To prevent broadcasting announcements to all connected users across the platform, every event gets its own isolated Room in Socket.io.

Attendees automatically join the room corresponding to the event they are viewing or registered for:

Implementation Flow:
On the Client: Emit a join event when viewing the event page:
socket.emit("join-event", eventId)
On the Server: Listen for the join event and assign the socket to that room:
socket.on("join-event", (eventId) => socket.join(eventId))
🎯
Why use Rooms?
Rooms ensure targeted broadcasting so that announcements sent for Event A only reach members inside Event A's room.

Build the endpoint that allows admins to post and broadcast announcements:

Endpoint Specification:
POST /api/announcements — Admin-only route.

Requirements:
Protected using requireAuth and requireRole("admin") middlewares.
Extracts eventId and text from the request body.
Persists the announcement record to MongoDB using the Message model.
Emits the saved announcement in real-time to the event room:
io.to(eventId).emit("announcement", message)
⚠️
Important Developer Note
You must pass or attach the io instance to your controller (e.g., via req.app.get("io") or controller parameter) so the endpoint can trigger real-time socket events during HTTP requests.

Build an endpoint to fetch past announcements so users joining an event room late don't miss previous messages:

Endpoint Specification:
GET /api/announcements/:eventId

Requirements:
Public Endpoint: Anyone can read the announcement history.
Returns all messages linked to eventId, sorted chronologically from oldest to newest.
Uses Mongoose's populate() on the sender field to populate sender details (e.g., admin name/email).
✅
User Experience Benefit
Late joiners receive immediate context by loading past history over HTTP before listening for new socket broadcasts.

How to Test Your Implementation:
Once completed, open two browser tabs (or Postman + a web page):

Tab 1 (Attendee): Connect to the socket and join an event room.
Tab 2 (Admin): Send a POST /api/announcements request.
Result: The announcement should instantly display in Tab 1 without refreshing!
🚀
What's Next?
In Task 6, we will cover Input Validation, Centralized Error Handling, and Automated Unit/Integration Testing. See you in the next video!